In this video, I'll be reviewing
Java's decision constructs.
These are the if/else statements as well as
the switch statement.
The if statement allows conditional
execution of a statement,
or block of statements,
or a choice of two statements or statement blocks.
I'm sure you know it well.
Some things to remember.
The words 'then', and 'elseif' are not valid,
these are from other languages.
If you do not have a bracket after the if or else,
then only one line of code is contained
within the conditional block.
You can have an empty statement block after the if or else
as long as a semi-colon follows.
Dangling elses are assumed to go with the inner most
if statement.
We'll actually be walking through
some common including mistakes,
and items that might find their way
into an exam question as well.
So let's start by creating a new project called "Decisions"
which I've already done.
Then I'm going to create a new class now
called "IfElseExamples".
Now what I'm gonna do here is paste some code
to get us started.
Note that line 12 is completely valid
if flag in parentheses with a semi-colon.
Just needs the semi-colon to make the line valid.
So you might be a bit surprised by the fact that
the lines 12 and 13 works.
Looking at the code from lines 18 through 22
the compiler is formatting the code nicely here
indicating what is really going on.
However look for similar code on the exam
where it's not formatted neatly or you.
So just to confirm let's actually run this code.
You can see that we got "1. flag is false"
and "2. flag is false" based on that code.
Alright so let's look at the way you might see
a nested if/else on an exam question.
So I'm going to paste the code in now
and I'm going to use a feature intended to help in pasting
so that it doesn't paste formatted.
So we actually see it as you might see it in the exam.
I'm gonna do "Paste without Formatting".
All right so as you can see the comment on line 24
"Formatted to mislead..." now.
I think particularly the code starting at line 30
does look like its a possible compiler error, doesn't it?
So notice nothing from the third if/else statement
is actually printed.
So that's the code starting on line 25.
'Cause we've already established down at the bottom
that flag is set to false.
And when flag is false the else in this statement
that prints 3 is false is actually part of the inner else
which gets excused only if flag is true.
Let's confirm this and run the code.
You can see the error report we got is one, two, and four.
And obviously we get our "4. Flag is false".
So again that is an example of question
you may get in the exam
with the formatting designed to confuse you,
and basically make you get the answer wrong.
All right so moving on.
I want to now try a code example that
probably most of us have inadvertently coded
at one time or another.
So lets put that code in or paste that code in.
Quickly run the code,
And you can see flag is true there.
So why's that happening when we know,
I've made it very obvious that I want to be
setting flag as false.
Well flags true here because of the if statement
condition was actually doing an assignment
and not evaluating an expression.
We felt where writing if flag is equal to true,
but we typed if "flag = true"
which assigns the value true to flag
and so this condition is always true now.
Some example questions look very simple.
I'll paste this code in.
You can see what the code is doing
is testing precedence/assignment
inside an if/else statement.
So if we actually run this,
We get true, false, and false.
The expression in the if statement
is evaluated left to right,
so a is assigned true but everything to the right
of the conditional or operator is ignored
because the expression on the left evaluated true.
A little bit sneaky.
Let's try another example.
All right so we run the code,
and we get true, true, false here.
The explanation for this,
is that the conditional and statement
needs to evaluate both statements to determine
the resulting boolan which would be true
and again the conditional or requires only the left side
to be evaluated if it returns true.
All right so lets end the video here.
In the next video we'll start taking a look at
the switch design construct in Java.
See you in the next video.